[Power](Glossary#power) in Bitcoin rests with [miners](Glossary#miner) and [merchants](Glossary#merchant). Yet these two powers are not "balanced" between each other, as if locked in some sort of [checks-and-balances](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_powers#Checks_and_balances) system. Miner power is [orthogonal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orthogonality) to merchant power. Miners control [transaction](Glossary#transaction) selection, merchants control [validity](Glossary#validity), and neither can control the other. Not surprisingly, in the original [description](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf) and [implementation](Glossary#implementation) these roles were combined.

Power is not the same as influence. Merchants can influence miners by not buying the service. Miners can similarly influence merchants by not producing it. These choices manifest as [splits](Glossary#split) or [stalls](Glossary#stall). However the nature of power is that it can (and often does) ignore influence. The [state](Glossary#state) has power; it can apply [coercion](Glossary#coercion) and [co-option](Glossary#co-option) while ignoring influence. Merchants and miners *together* have the [power to defend](Risk-Sharing-Principle) against these aggressions, but neither can do so without the support of the other.

The balance of *power* in Bitcoin is between [individuals](Glossary#person) and the state. Even states create systems that [attempt](https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm) to isolate their moneys from [political](Glossary#political) control. Bitcoin is no different in that sense, incorporating the [resistance axiom](Axiom-of-Resistance). Individuals can be miners and can be merchants. With broad [distribution](Risk-Sharing-Principle) of these activities it becomes difficult for state actors to [censor](Glossary#censorship) this [market](Glossary#market) established for mutual benefit by these individuals. **The idea that miners and merchants are in an adversarial position is a failure to understand the Bitcoin security model.**

Merchants purchase a service from miners and as such the two are engaged in [trade](Glossary#trade). Merchants purchase mining services that conform to their [rules](Glossary#consensus-rules) for a satisfactory [fee](Glossary#fee). They are free to split and miners are free to not mine at all, or to not select particular transactions for whatever [reason](Glossary#censorship) suits them. Trade is neither adversarial nor asymmetrical, it is voluntary and mutually-beneficial, with all tensions resolved in [price](Glossary#price).

This failure in understanding leads people to believe that mining can be centrally [pooled](Glossary#pooling) as long as merchants are not [centralized](Glossary#centralization) in validation, as the [economy](Glossary#economy) can control the behavior of mining, rendering the system secure. This belief is incorrect but unfortunately people are [drawing this invalid conclusion](https://www.coindesk.com/uasf-revisited-will-bitcoins-user-revolt-leave-lasting-legacy) from recent events. A [closely-related fallacy](Proof-of-Work-Fallacy) is the belief that a [proof-of-work](Glossary#proof) [fork](Glossary#fork) by merchants can control miner behavior.