[Fiat] money exists to collect [seigniorage], which is a [sovereign] tax on the holding of the money. The tax is levied by manufacture of units of the money denominated above its production cost in the money (i.e. counterfeit). The objective of the tax is to accumulate political power, including reserve money. Reserve money is that which is accepted by others and cannot be counterfeited by the sovereign as cost-effectively as its own money.

The existence of a reserve presupposes fiat. Otherwise there is no reason for two monies. The reserve retains its value despite the purposeful [debasement] of fiat, and is eventually held primarily by the sovereign. The current (third) United States Federal Reserve was instituted [in 1913](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Reserve_Act).

Initially legal tender laws create demand for fiat, which must be purchased with the reserve money. Such laws were applied broadly in the United States [in 1862](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_Tender_Cases). As reserves accumulate and fiat becomes widely accepted, the sovereign may seize what remains without immediate risk to future tax on other economic activity. This is done in part by abandoning fiat-reserve convertibility and also by direct confiscation. In the United States domestic confiscation and non-convertibility occurred [in 1933] and non-convertibility was applied to nation-state fiat holders [in 1971].

It is common for the fiat money of one state to become the reserve of another. This allows the issuer of fiat held in reserve by others to transitively tax holders of lower tier fiat. This tax is begrudgingly accepted by other sovereigns in exchange for the ability to [purchase products] available primarily in the global reserve. Restriction of access to the electronic network of the global reserve is often used as an [economic weapon]. The US Dollar and to a lesser extent the Euro make up the vast majority of [global reserves].

Fiat is typically "paper" and/or metal currency used alongside account-based money. Since issuance is the source of taxation, money accounts, now largely electronic, are brought under control of the sovereign. As such fiat issuance is primarily electronic. This occurred in the United States in 1914, coincident with creation of the reserve system. With the Federal Reserve Act the state gained physical control over reserves, issuance of fiat, and regulatory control over money accounts.

Electronic money is harder for third parties to counterfeit, and gives the issuer visibility into all financial transactions. This visibility is another tax on users of the money, as it compels increased compliance with independent takings. Avoidance of these takings is referred to as [tax evasion] and [money laundering] by the state, depending on context. As such we are witnessing the gradual [disappearance] of tangible paper and metal money.

The only brake on the counterfeit of fiat is the inability or unwillingness of people to pay the tax. This results in [abandonment] of the money despite legal tender laws. As this takes hold the sovereign typically creates [foreign exchange controls] to raise the cost of using alternate monies, though such controls can have high enforcement costs. Eventually the reserve money is utilized by both individuals and the sovereign.

With the inability to tax at sufficient levels comes consumption of the reserve, which was ultimately insurance against the failure of the fiat. This is a [sovereign debt crisis], manifested as a [currency crisis], and likely to result in a [political crisis]. With the establishment of a [new sovereign], the process resets.

As most global reserve is in fiat, a failure in the reserved fiat will propagate through all state monies. Historically the process has reset with the [transition to gold and/or silver]. That is infeasible in a future failure since trade is largely electronic and metals do not travel over computer networks. In other words, Bitcoin is the only money that can reset a modern currency crisis in the global reserve without a catastrophic contraction of trade globally.

Because people [can mine and accept Bitcoin covertly] and globally, it will be difficult for states to collect it into a reserve, which stands to break the cycle. This is ultimately the promise of Bitcoin. As shown in [Reserve Currency Fallacy], if it was to become primarily a reserve it would cease to be Bitcoin. However it will always be possible to continue it in the expectation that people will better defend it after learning from past failures.