There is a theory that [mining](Glossary#mine) "follows" [price](Glossary#price), or more specifically, [reward](Glossary#reward) [value](Glossary#value). The implication is that mining is slaved to price, lacking any input into [coin](Glossary#coin) [utility](Glossary#utility).

Consider the [miner](Glossary#miner) who responds only to historical [reward](Glossary#reward) [values](Glossary#value). This [person](Glossary#person) cannot be the first miner, because the reward has no historical value. No price can be established because no [trades](Glossary#trade) have occurred. The miner might have heard that a number of [unconfirmed](Glossary#unconfirmed) [units](Glossary#units) bought a pizza, but maybe the same units are [double-spent](Glossary#double-spend). He must anticipate a certain level of future net return on capital that is unknowable until it either materializes, or does not. This is the nature of entrepreneurial risk. The risk must be taken before the product can exist. One might believe that the risk can be shifted to the consumer, with advance ordering. But at that point the consumer has become the entrepreneur, providing the capital for, and assuming the risk of, production.

It is certainly possible for a miner to respond only to historical reward values once history has been established by someone else's risk-taking. But what is the time window and method of averaging that predicts future reward values? The unique ability to predict exchange prices would provide the miner unlimited riches. If it could be done generally, price would never change, as all potential changes would be discounted upon first minting. So either price changes unpredictably, or not at all. In other words, every miner faces the same situation as the first. Historical prices do not exist that can predict future prices.

Assuming a [market](Glossary#market) average return on mining capital generally, both overestimation and underestimation of reward value imply loss in relation to the cost of capital. Given the nature of competition, profits and losses (above and below market returns on capital respectively) experience constant negative existential pressure. In other words, the market attempts to eliminate these errors. But given the unpredictable nature of price, it can never actually do so. Production never seeks demand that exists, which is inherently historical, it always seeks demand that it anticipates. Production continues to guess at future consumption and in doing so either creates the opportunity for consumption, or creates nothing at all (shortages).

One could say that miners converge on a market return on capital and by anticipating highest possible [fee](Glossary#fee) values. But [merchants](Glossary#merchants) similarly converge on a market return on miner capital by seeking the lowest fee value. Miners seek high fee value and merchants seek low fee value. However, miners must anticipate merchants and risk mining before there can be any utility. So to the extent that there is any asymmetry, mining precedes [transacting](Glossary#transaction), just as all production must precede consumption. Assuming otherwise conflates the direction a market seeks with the manner in which it does so.