There is a theory that security is increased by [decoupling](Glossary#decouple) [reward](Glossary#reward) from [transaction](Glossary#transaction) selection in [pooled](Glossary#pooling) [mining](Glossary#mine). The theory holds that by sharing only the reward, control over transaction selection shifts to [miners](Glossary#miner) with less [hash power](Glossary#hash-power). This implies a reduction in the [variance discount](Variance-Discount-Flaw) and therefore an increase the [competitiveness](Other-Means-Principle) of smaller mines. Because smaller mines can presumably operate more covertly than larger, this in turn implies that [censorship](Glossary#censorship) [resistance](Axiom-of-Resistance) is increased.

The theory fails to recognize that control over transaction selection remains with the [person](Glossary#person) operating the pool, and is therefore invalid. The sole benefit is [variance](Glossary#variance) reduction, but this is only realized by the receipt of payment. As payment is discretionary any condition may be attached. Such conditions may include censorship and [identity](Glossary#identity). Member recourse is to leave the pool for another, just as with a coupled pool. As such decoupled pools and coupled pools are equally subject to [co-option](Glossary#co-option).

There is a theory that transparency of a decoupled pool is greater than that of a coupled pool, facilitating flight of members to non-censoring pools, therefore limiting the dominance of censoring pools. Generously accepting the assumptions of greater transparency and independent miners operating against financial self-interest, we are still left with the fact of co-option. The [state](Glossary#state) can still reserve for itself the ability to operate with the financial advantages of pooling.