There is a theory that [miners](Glossary#miner) gain financial advantage over other miners by [mining](Glossary#mine) their own [transactions](Glossary#transaction) and "recovering" their own [fees](Glossary#fee).

The theory ignores the [opportunity cost](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost) of mining [block](Glossary#block) space without collecting payment for it. Payment of a fee to one's self is a financial non-event. Failure to collect a fee is a real cost in the amount forgone, as the cost of mining that portion of the block is uncompensated.

**The result is a lower return on capital relative to miners who sell all block space.** Given the [zero sum](Zero-Sum-Property) nature of mining this disparity allows the more rational miners to increase their [hash power](Glossary#hash-power). In other words the consequence is the opposite of that proposed, and the theory is therefore invalid.

There is a related theory that fee estimation tools may be fooled into recommending higher fees than are required. As shown in [Side Fee Fallacy](Side-Fee-Fallacy) this implies a relationship between historical and future fee rates that does not exist, and that all fees are visible on [chain](Glossary#chain), which is not the case. Finally, any general fee increase encouraged by such a strategy affects all miners equally. As mining is zero sum there is no benefit to *any* miner from a general fee level increase. In fact all miners suffer from the [reduced utility](Stability-Property) of the money (which has been financed in full by the uncompensated miner). This theory is therefore also invalid.