There is a theory that an increased level of [hoarding](Glossary#hoard) produces an increased level of security in a [coin](Glossary#coin). This is the similar to the [Dumping Fallacy](Dumping-Fallacy) but is not necessarily based on a [split](Glossary#split).

An increase can only be described relative to some base level. If a [person](Glossary#person) can be convinced that there is increased system security in a higher collective hoarding level, the theory holds that the person may decide to hoard more than would otherwise be optimal (i.e. the person's base level). This amounts to an actual individual cost with a presumed socialized benefit. In other words the theory depends on irrational economic behavior, even if the security benefit is actual, and is therefore invalid.

The presumed security benefit to an elevated level of hoarding stems from the theory that an [owner](Glossary#owner) has a say in [validation](Glossary#validation) and could act to prevent the [economy](Glossary#economy) from accepting what the owners collectively consider [invalid](Glossary#validity) money. However owners are not acting unless they [trade](Glossary#trade) [units](Glossary#unit) for something, and in this case it is the [merchant](Glossary#merchant) who enforces [consensus rules](Glossary#consensus-rules). The possibility that owners could act in unison does not increase this zero level of control. The theory is therefore invalid.

Finally, the theory implies that less trade in the coin will produce greater security. This is the opposite of the case. As shown in [Qualitative Security Model](Qualitative-Security-Model), consensus rule enforcement requires ongoing trade. The [price](Glossary#price) of a unit of the coin is arbitrary, but rises temporarily if individuals are convinced to engage in the fallacy. The benefit of this increase accrues to existing owners. The theory that price can only rise is a related [speculative](Glossary#speculation) error explored in [Lunar Fallacy](Lunar-Fallacy), but even if true would not validate this theory.