There is a theory that [miners](Glossary#miner) have no [power](Glossary#power). This is distinct from the closely-related [Proof of Work Fallacy](Proof-of-Work-Fallacy). The theory rests on the assumption that miners are subject to [economic](Glossary#economy) pressures that preclude sustained effective [attacks](Glossary#attack). This theory leads [people](Glossary#person) to believe that mining can be strongly [pooled](Glossary#pooling) as long as [merchants](Glossary#merchant) are not [centralized](Glossary#centralization), as the economy can control the behavior of mining, rendering the system secure. The consequence of this invalid theory is complacency regarding the insecurity caused by pooling.

The theory holds that if [majority hash power](Glossary#majority-hash-power) [double-spends](Glossary#double-spend) then merchants will necessarily increase [confirmation](Glossary#confirmation) [depth](Glossary#depth) requirements, increasing the cost of subsequent attacks. At some point an equilibrium is reached where greater depths are considered sufficient for [exchange](Glossary#exchange). Given that this would preclude double-spending altogether, there would be no advantage to sustaining the attack. The theory accepts that attacks can happen, but not frequently enough to materially reduce [utility](Glossary#utility).

The theory also holds that a miner cannot avoid selecting the highest fee [transactions](Glossary#transaction) as this reduces relative [reward](Glossary#reward), enriching other miners. This is presumed to lead to a loss of majority power and therefore an inability to continue. This aspect of the theory implies that miners cannot effectively [censor](Glossary#censorship).

Miners and merchants are trading partners, engaged voluntarily in mutually-beneficial activity. As explored in the [Balance of Power Fallacy](Balance-of-Power-Fallacy), neither can control the other and [price](Glossary#price) is the resolution of all preferences. This would seem to support the theory, however the theory is actually a [red herring](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_herring) as it **does not address the threat**. Bitcoin is designed to defend against *non*-[market](Glossary#market) forces, specifically the [state](Glossary#state). Market forces are never a threat to the market itself.

The pooling of [hash power](Glossary#hash-power) eviscerates security, as states can simply [co-opt](Glossary#co-option) it. But states can also build their own [mines](Glossary#mine) to the same effect. Bitcoin therefore requires both significant hash power *and* distribution of that power among people who are willing and able to [risk state controls](Risk-Sharing-Principle).

The state is an economically rational actor. [Inflation](Glossary#inflation) is profitable for the issuer. Bitcoin's widespread use would prevent states from effectively levying the [inflation tax](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage). State attacks are therefore expected, and analogous attacks are [commonplace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls). It is practically inevitable that states will subsidize attacks, but even the possibility invalidates the theory.
