Miners play a [zero sum game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-sum_game) within, but not against, a [positive sum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Win-win_game) [economy](Glossary#economy). They compete with each other, not the [economy](Glossary#economy).

As the [utility](Glossary#utility) of Bitcoin to [people](Glossary#person) increases, both the [fee](Glossary#fee) level and [exchange](Glossary#exchange) [price](Glossary#price) necessarily increase. These increases both contribute to [reward](Glossary#reward) utility. However [coin](Glossary#coin) utility is not unbounded, it is decreased by rising fees and always limited by [substitutes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substitute_good). [Exchange](Glossary#exchange) rates are a measure of utility, including the [present value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value) of expectations. Rising price is the reflection of a positive sum, or increasing utility for the average [owner](Glossary#owner).

Initially rising utility creates a higher [rate of return](Glossary#interest) on capital [investment](Glossary#invest) in [hash rate](Glossary#hash-rate). This creates an [opportunity cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost) for not capturing the outsized return. This in turn causes an increase in capital investment and therefore hash rate from existing and/or new [miners](Glossary#miner). The increase is eventually captured in a [difficulty](Glossary#difficulty) [adjustment](Glossary#adjustment), returning average rate of return to [market](Glossary#market) levels.

It has been argued that [blocks](Glossary#block) mined in a period of rising price actually produce outsized returns for miners, at least until the adjustment. This is based on the classic failure to understand that [market prices are not predictable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaos_theory). Investments dependent on price changes are always [speculative](Glossary#speculation). There is no reason to assume that Bitcoin *speculation* is any more or less effective than any other. The same reasoning applies to [coinbase](Glossary#coinbase) [maturity](Glossary#maturity).

Bitcoin mining *investment* on the other hand is based on the predictable relationship between price, hash rate, difficulty, and competition over time. That relationship predicts that the average of all mining approaches the market rate of interest over time. As with all markets, shorter time periods are unpredictable in price and longer periods approach market returns. Ultimately [time preference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference) controls the market rate of investment return.

So how does a miner achieve outsized returns? It cannot be done with [side fee agreements](Side-Fee-Fallacy). There is only one way to make a higher-than-market rate of return, which is to have a below average cost of [hash power](Glossary#hash-power) for the coin. This is achieved by either taking advantage of [pooling pressures](Pooling-Pressure-Risk) or through superior operational efficiency. Because of the [zero sum property](Zero-Sum-Property), these are offset by lower-than-market rates of return by other miners. The premium is limited for a miner above 50% hash rate and nonexistent at 100%.

However other miners will eventually exit as their capital seeks market returns. This would leave one miner, bound to market returns. In other words, making outsized returns requires others from whom to capture those returns. The highest return that can be sustained is a function of the greatest opportunity cost others are willing to sustain. This is a function of differential reward utility, as discussed in [Threat Level Paradox](Threat-Level-Paradox).

By limiting [dividends](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dividend) to market rates of return and reinvesting all other reward, a miner can maintain a constant hash power and thereby obtain market returns against a capital base proportional to Bitcoin [capitalization](Glossary#capitalization). Reinvesting dividends increases hash power and liquidation decreases it. [Grinds](Glossary#grind) are liquidated by reduction of reinvestment, taking each device offline as it becomes a net negative producer, or [discounting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value) those future returns by selling the mine.

**[Merchants](Glossary#merchant) and [owners](Glossary#owner) are not financially affected by miner returns, and miner returns are not affected by price or fee level. Fee level and miner returns are strictly a consequence of time preference and price is a strictly consequence of utility.** The relationship between the economy and miners is further explored in [Balance of Power Fallacy](Balance-of-Power-Fallacy).