Miners play a [zero sum game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-sum_game) within a [positive sum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Win-win_game) [economy](Glossary#economy).

As the [utility](Glossary#utility) of Bitcoin to [people](Glossary#person) increases, both the [fee](Glossary#fee) level and [exchange](Glossary#exchange) [price](Glossary#price) necessarily increase. These increases both contribute to [reward](Glossary#reward) utility. However [coin](Glossary#coin) utility is not unbounded, it is decreased by rising fees and always limited by [substitutes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substitute_good). [Exchange](Glossary#exchange) rates are a measure of utility, including the [capitalization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value) of expectations.

Initially rising utility creates a higher [rate of return](Glossary#interest) on capital [investment](Glossary#invest) in [hash rate](Glossary#hash-rate). This creates an [opportunity cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost) for not capturing the outsized return. This in turn causes an increase in capital investment and therefore hash rate from existing and/or new [miners](Glossary#miner). The increase is eventually captured in a [difficulty](Glossary#difficulty) [adjustment](Glossary#adjustment), returning average rate of return to [market](Glossary#market) levels.

It has been argued that [blocks](Glossary#block) mined in a period of rising price actually produce outsized returns for miners, at least until the adjustment. This is based on the classic failure to understand that [market prices are not predictable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaos_theory). Investments dependent on price changes are always [speculative](Glossary#speculation). There is no reason to assume that Bitcoin *speculation* is any more or less effective than any other. Bitcoin mining *investment* on the other hand is based on the predictable relationship between price, hash rate, difficulty, and competition over time. That relationship predicts that the average of all mining approaches the market rate of interest over time. As with all markets, shorter time periods are unpredictable in price and over time the markets seek market returns. Ultimately [time preference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference) controls the market rate of investment return.

So how does a miner achieve outsized returns? There is only one way to make a higher-than-market rate of return on mining, which is to have a below average cost of [hash power](Glossary#hash-power) for the coin. This is achieved either by taking advantage of [pooling pressures](Pooling-Pressure-Risk) or through superior operational efficiency. Because of the [zero sum property](Zero-Sum-Property), these are offset by lower-than-market rates of return by other miners.

It cannot be done with [side fee agreements](Side-Fee-Fallacy), and it cannot be done with 