Bitcoin is an [act of resistance](Axiom-of-Resistance), an attempt to "gain a new territory of freedom." Freedom contracts through the constant pressure of compulsory financing of the [state](Glossary#state). It is typical that freedom is expanded through bloodshed, with the specific objective of reducing state power. Bitcoin cannot eliminate the need for personal risk in achieving this objective. However, through [risk sharing](Risk-Sharing-Principle) it can potentially reduce the [inflation tax](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage) without spilling blood. This will not eliminate tax generally, however it will reduce state power by making tax significantly more visible.

This conflict between state and [individuals](Glossary#person) for control of money will pass through four phases anticipated by the Bitcoin [security model](Qualitative-Security-Model). These will overlap and vary regionally, but are each clearly identifiable.

1. Honeymoon
2. Black Market
3. Competitive
4. Surrender

The honeymoon phase is characterized by a desire of state agencies to retain regulatory control over the movement of money and securities. To this end pressure is applied at points of [aggregation](Glossary#aggregation). As pressure on [pooled](Glossary#pooling) [miners](Glossary#miner) and [centralized](Glossary#centralization) [merchants](Glossary#merchant) increases, cost rises and utility drops. The money then necessarily [becomes more distributed](Threat-Level-Paradox) to avoid these costs.

As it becomes apparent that controls on points of aggregation are insufficient enforcement, and the awareness surfaces that [seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage) is at risk, [transaction](Glossary#transaction) in and mining of Bitcoin is [outlawed](Hearn-Error). As states collaborate to protect their monies, this may become a global "War on Bitcoin". This may coincide with adoption of an official new money, i.e. Fedcoin. The objective would be to appear to embrace a "safer" money than Bitcoin while retaining the seigniorage and surveillance advantages of electronic fiat. The two essential elements of Fedcoin are (1) an [inflation](Glossary#inflation) [hard fork](Glossary#hard-fork) to allow introduction of new [units](Glossary#unit) based on the signature of a state agency, and (2) a [censorship](Glossary#censorship) [soft fork](Glossary#soft-fork) with the requirement that all transactions are signed by the state. The former protects seigniorage and the latter facilitates other tax collection through [taint](Glossary#taint).

Assuming sufficient resistance Bitcoin persists independent of Fedcoin as a black market money. At this point the state concludes that the best way to defeat it is to compete as a miner. Given that mining is [necessarily anonymous](Public-Data-Principle), there is [no way](Proof-of-Work-Fallacy) for the [economy](Glossary#economy) to prevent state participation in mining. Thus Bitcoin enters the competitive phase, with the state attempting a perpetual [51% attack](Glossary#majority-hash-power).

Apart from ongoing black market phase enforcement, the competitive phase is characterized by a peaceful [hash power](Glossary#hash-power) battle between the state and individuals. The state operates at a [loss](Glossary#loss) due to the rejection of censored transactions. This loss is offset by tax revenue. [Fee](Glossary#fee) pressure on censored transactions rises until the state mining tax subsidy is offset by this fee level. **At this point taxes and censored transaction fees both rise until one side of the conflict surrenders.** In this manner Bitcoin can potentially win a war [by other means](https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Carl_von_Clausewitz). It cannot be assumed that this surrender will be perpetual. As implied by the [Threat Level Paradox](Threat-Level-Paradox), the money is likely to drift into previous phases as the threat diminishes.