The potential [capitalization](Glossary#capitalization), and therefore potential [unit](Glossary#unit) [price](Glossary#price), of Bitcoin is estimated in various ways. A common approach is to imagine Bitcoin replacing [all state money](https://www.fool.com/investing/2017/05/25/could-the-price-of-bitcoin-go-to-1-million.aspx) or even [gross world product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gross_world_product). Other approaches that use [models of past price](https://medium.com/@100trillionUSD/modeling-bitcoins-value-with-scarcity-91fa0fc03e25) to predict future price are [economically irrational](Stock-to-Flow-Fallacy) and therefore not considered here. The presumption of Bitcoin as global [reserve currency](Reservation-Principle) is dismissed for reasons discussed in [Reserve Currency Fallacy](Reserve-Currency-Fallacy). The effects on price of speculative hoarding are not considered based on the [Catallactic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics) disproof of speculation as a determinant of price.

Given that Bitcoin is [money](Money-Taxonomy) and not [credit](Glossary#lend), the "money" approach is a more rational starting assumption. Yet without a clear understanding of the essential distinction between money and credit, this approach is often flawed in practice. As shown in [Credit Expansion Fallacy](Credit-Expansion-Fallacy), Bitcoin cannot limit credit expansion. If it eliminated credit expansion (hypothetically), there would be no production whatsoever and it would be worth nothing. The most rational starting assumption regarding credit expansion, is that Bitcoin is reserved at the same rate as other monies. The rate of credit expansion is driven by human [time preference](https://github.com/libbitcoin/libbitcoin-system/wiki/Time-Preference-Fallacy) alone, so this is an assumption that production is therefore consistent with historical norms.

Let us consider four possible definitions for the "money" to replace:

* Tangible money.
* Base money (M0).
* Bank credit (M3-M1).
* All credit (bank, debt, equity).
* Gross product.

Using tangible money ("vault cash") only is an irrational approach. The money that is accounted for as a money equivalent must also be included if one is to consider tangible money, since they are of the same supply. [Central banks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank) print and coin tangible money when required, against a base of "obligations" to do so, and all credit in the money is expanded against this base. This concept is discussed in [State Banking Principle](State-Banking-Principle). Using credit is also an irrational approach, since Bitcoin is not credit. As a money it is used to [settle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement_(finance)) credit obligations. This concept is discussed in [Debt Loop Fallacy](Debt-Loop-Fallacy). So of course using any combination of money and credit (such as [M1, M2 or M3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply#United_States), as these include M0) is irrational by the same reasoning. Gross product is similarly unjustifiable for substitution as it is neither money nor credit.

However, for the sake of comparison, let us estimate each of the five options listed above. Base values for the following table are U.S. Dollar amounts borrowed from [Credit Expansion Fallacy](Credit-Expansion-Fallacy). These are expanded by an estimate of [relative size](https://seekingalpha.com/article/4202768-u-s-percent-world-stock-market-cap-tops-40-percent) of the the world economy by equity market capitalization. The U.S. market is approximately 40% of global markets. Therefore these values exceed U.S. numbers by a factor of 1/40%. This favors simplicity over precision, as the only objective is to demonstrate a rational method of estimation. The amount of Bitcoin assumed is 18,952,500 given 95% mined (~10 years future) and 5% lost (e.g. Satoshi lost private keys).

Valuations are based on 2019 numbers though Bitcoin [inflation](Glossary#inflation) is based on 2029. This implies that values should be higher based on the assumption of economic growth and U.S. Dollar [monetary inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation). The latter can be eliminated by considering this a constant 2019 dollar projection. Assuming 2% annual real [economic growth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_growth) compounded for 10 years, the 2029 values have been increased by ~22%.

| Substitute       | Size  (2019)         | USD/BTC (2029) |
|------------------|----------------------|----------------|
| Tangible money   |   $4,347,460,000,000 |       $279,852 |
| **Base money**   |   $8,187,102,500,000 |       $527,016 |
| Bank credit      |  $36,018,735,000,000 |     $2,318,578 |
| All credit       | $236,812,492,891,206 |    $15,243,965 |
| Gross product    |  $80,270,000,000,000 |     $5,167,097 |

The global base money replacement estimate is $527,016. Now we consider the base assumption, of replacement of all money. Bitcoin offers [no security](https://github.com/libbitcoin/libbitcoin-system/wiki/Permissionless-Principle) against state prohibition of its use in [trade](Glossary#trade). Under the assumption that states intend to retain seigniorage and [censorship](Glossary#censorship), we might reduce this number to the estimated size of the global black market, which is estimated to be ~28% of the global market. The base money estimate includes *all* market activity in the money (credit estimates do not). At replacement 100% of estimated black market trade the price is $146,194. However given the assumption that state monies are in exclusive use in the white market, we cannot assume 100% of black market activity in Bitcoin. This number has no basis for estimation, but at 50% the price would be $73,097 in 2019 dollars.

This estimate does not consider the [stability property](Stability-Property) of Bitcoin. Given the scope of trade replaced at the level of 50% of the black market, it is possible that trade would be forced into [monetary substitutes](https://github.com/libbitcoin/libbitcoin-system/wiki/Substitution-Principle) well before the price estimated above can be reached. Therefore the above estimate should be considered an upper bound under the given assumptions.