Production and consumption are the complimentary processes of producing and consuming [economic goods](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods_and_services). As all property is [owned](Glossary#owner) by [people](Glossary#person), these are necessarily human actions. The *roles* of [producer and consumer](Labor-and-Leisure) should not be conflated with the *acts* of production and consumption. A role refers to *intent* not *action*. All producers consume and all consumers produce. A [pure bank](Pure-Bank) produces the service of liquid investment, an economic good. The cost of production is the [depreciation](Depreciation-Principle) of its reserve. This is the model of all production.

A pure producer has *borrowed* capital, consuming it in the creation of a product. The consumed fraction at any time has been *loaned* to production. The unconsumed fraction at any time has been *reserved* for liquidity. The new product is sold, obtaining *interest* on the consumed fraction, *returned* as [dividend](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dividend). As production requires time, and as perfect efficiency is assumed, the [reservation](Reservation-Principle) rate declines from 100% to 0% over time. The amount of reserve is the same necessary productive expense as the pure bank's liquidity reserve. **The reserve is only repopulated by more borrowed capital, such as by dividend reinvestment.**

A real producer converts time and capital to interest, at the [market](Glossary#market) [price](Glossary#price) of the product produced, just as a real bank obtains [interest](Glossary#interest) at the market price. The bank is merely obtaining the interest of another producer by being its investor. This shows the fundamental equivalence of lending as debt and equity, independent of [statutory](Glossary#state) distinctions (tax).

A pure consumer hoards capital without any *loaned* to production. All capital is *borrowed* and *reserved*. At 100% reserve there is no *interest*, no *return*, and eventually full depreciation. In this case the borrowed capital is considered a gift ([charity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charity_(practice))). A real consumer is additionally subject to tax and subsidy, which increases and decreases the rate of hoard depreciation respectively.