It has been proposed that a [proof-of-memory](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/893.pdf) (PoM) can replace some fraction of the PoW energy cost with hardware, even relying on existing memory devices. As shown in [Energy Waste Fallacy](Energy-Waste-Fallacy), a constant level of security requires a constant ongoing expenditure. Therefore such a system would require a comparable level of hardware consumption to offset any reduction in energy cost.

**In other words total energy consumption cannot be reduced, it can only be transferred in full to hardware manufacture, operation and disposal.** The hardware acts as a proof battery, representing energy provably consumed in its manufacture.

It is worth considering the economic behavior of a theoretical system in which PoM is determined by an existing (free) fixed pool of memory with no expiration or operational costs. As the cost of [mining](Glossary#mine) is zero, rewards flow at no expense in proportion to memory (assuming no [pooling pressures](Pooling-Pressure-Risk)). Any increase in average fee increases this reward for memory. Capital [invested](Glossary#lend) is zero and therefore [rate of return](Glossary#interest) is perpetually infinite. Despite unbounded incentive, the assumption of zero expansion precludes competition. But since the proof is externalized, competition cannot actually be restricted. In an actual system hardware manufacture expands perpetually for a given fee level, and this rate of expansion grows with fee level increases.