[Latency](Glossary#latency) is the time required for [communication](Glossary#communication). Information moves at a speed not greater than the [speed of light](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_light) and therefore latency cannot be eliminated. Different distances between [miners](Glossary#miner) implies [announcements](Glossary#announcement) will be known to some before others.

While a [miner](Glossary#miner) remains unaware of an announcement he wastes capital [grinding](Glossary#grind) on an [weak](Glossary#weak) [candidate](Glossary#candidate). As more time passes it becomes exponentially less likely that the miner will be [rewarded](Glossary#reward) for the candidate. Miners therefore compete to see announcements before other miners, as this reduces [opportunity cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost).

If we were to disperse miners with equal [hash rate](Glossary#hash-rate) at equidistant points around the Earth they would experience the same latency. Yet due to the financial benefit of reduced latency, they would tend to move closer to each other. This force is [pooling](Glossary#pooling) pressure, and manifests in several ways.

One manifestation is geographic, where independent miners become physically closer together. Another is cooperative, where formerly-independent miners join forces and co-locate grinding. Another is virtual, where miners become [grinders](Glossary#grinder) and aggregate hash rate to a single remote miner. Another is capital flow, since higher hash rate is a form of co-location. Another is the existence of [relays](Glossary#relay), which have the [same effect](Relay-Fallacy) as hash rate aggregation.

The term "[selfish mining](Selfish-Mining-Fallacy)" refers to a pooling pressure created by [withholding](Glossary#withholding). The financial benefit to improving cash flow by reducing [variance](Glossary#variance) is an aggregating pooling pressure. The [variation](Glossary#variation) and [distortion](Glossary#distortion) of [markets](Glossary#market) are geopolitical pooling pressures.

So there are other pooling pressures, but proximity-based pressures are caused by [consensus rules](Glossary#consensus-rules). Bitcoin prescribes winner-take-all [transaction](Glossary#transaction) ordering, which produces the opportunity cost described above, and therefore pooling pressure. High variance is a consequence of fixed difficulty, which is related to the ordering design. The design is also the basis of selfish mining. 

On the other hand variation and distortion are simply market and anti-market forces, respectively. The defense that Bitcoin *intends* to raise is market defense against anti-market forces. To do this it must distribute [hash power](Glossary#hash-power) broadly among [people](Glossary#person) so that it becomes difficult to [co-opt](Glossary#co-option). However pooling pressures inherent in the [consensus](Glossary#consensus) work against this objective. This is why the characteristic is termed a flaw.

