Following a [split](Glossary#split) it may be possible for the [spend](Glossary#spend) of certain [outputs](Glossary#output) to be [confirmed](Glossary#confirmation) on both the original [coin](Glossary#coin) [chain](Glossary#chain) and the split coin chain. In other words the recipient obtains [units](Glossary#unit) in both chains, known as "replay".

There is a theory that this dual confirmation constitutes an "attack" on the spender of the spent output. The theory assumes that the spender intends for the [transaction](Glossary#transaction) to spend outputs in one coin but not the other, though there is no way to actually identify the spender's intent. This fact alone is sufficient to consider the term a misnomer.

The split converts 1 unit on one chain into 2 units, 1 on each of the chains. The theory assumes that the 2 units, at least initially, represent the [utility](Glossary#utility) of the 1 unit prior to the split. In other words the combined chains have a certain [capitalization](Glossary#capitalization) which is divided between the coins, analogous to a [stock split](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_split).

In the case where a set of [merchants](Glossary#merchant) stop accepting the original coin and start accepting the split coin, the new network has been increased in size at the expense of the original. Since the size of the [economy](Glossary#economy) affects the utility of a money, it stands to reason that the effect is [dilutive](http://financial-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Dilutive+effect).

Unlike in the case of a stock split, the two coins are not interchangeable (fungible), which constitutes an [exchange](Glossary#exchange) cost. This is not dilutive but destructive of utility. This also implies that the split coin may have higher or lower utility than the original coin, making the split constructive or destructive of utility, respectively.