[Scalability](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalability) is the proportional increase in some aspect of performance as more hardware is employed. Bitcoin [transaction](Glossary#transaction) throughput is perfectly non-scalable as no amount of hardware increases it.

The [block](Glossary#block) size limit [consensus rule](Glossary#rule) establishes the arbitrary trade-off between [utility](Glossary#utility) and system security. Increased block size marginally increases [transaction](Glossary#transaction) throughput and therefore the resource cost of transaction [validation](Glossary#validation) (i.e. processing, storage, and bandwidth). As the cost of validation increases, [economic](Glossary#economy) security is adversely impacted by increased [centralization risk](Centralization-Risk). As the trade-off is arbitrary, there is no ideal size.

At any block size the system remains non-scalable due to the necessity of [confirmation](Glossary#confirmation) finality. A finite set of transactions must be selected, which implies that others may be excluded. This exclusion is financially motivated by the opportunity cost of not utilizing deployed [mining](Glossary#mine) capital, and is the manifestation of non-scalability. This necessitates a competitive [market](Glossary#market) for confirmation, and finances it in proportion to demand for the money.

Effective transaction carrying capacity, and therefore utility, can be increased by [layering](Glossary#layering). This represents a *local* and *time-limited* security compromise, in contrast to the *system-wide* and *persistent* security compromise of increasing block size. Either compromise lowers but does not eliminate the [utility threshold](Utility-Threshold-Property), which implies [stability](Stability-Property) is preserved.

**Therefore stability and non-scalability exist at any block size and level of layering.**