In the terminology of [Paul Baran's 1964 paper on distributed networks](http://web.cs.ucla.edu/classes/cs217/Baran64.pdf) the importance of topology in network design is in the ability of communications to withstand the loss of a certain number of nodes. A centralized (star) network will fail with the loss of one node. A distributed (mesh) network is more resilient. A hybrid of these systems is considered decentralized.

As a money Bitcoin forms a social graph. Only a [person](Glossary#person) can decide to accept one money or another in [trade](Glossary#trade). A society of people may share the same definition for a money, which is referred to as a [consensus](Glossary#consensus). Authority in a monetary system is the [power](Glossary#power) to define the money. Bitcoin is a tool that people can use defend against the tendency toward [authority](Glossary#state), in order to preserve their agreement and therefore [utility](Glossary#utility) in the money.

**In distributed systems terminology a Bitcoin "node" is a person and the system is money.** It does not matter how many [machines](Glossary#machine) the person controls, the loss of that person is a loss of a node in the system. As shown in [Risk Sharing Principle](Risk-Sharing-Principle), Bitcoin relies on decentralization to allow people to resist authority.

While it is essential that people are able able to [communicate](Glossary#communication), the [Public Data Principle](Public-Data-Principle) shows that [peers](Glossary#peer-to-peer) communicate entirely public information. The more widely spread the data, the more secure is the money. Protocols to [prevent observation](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0151.mediawiki) of the data serve no purpose other than as base technology required for [identity](Glossary#identity). Restricting communication to such [known parties](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0150.mediawiki) harms the money by [isolating](Glossary#partition) less desirable (or anonymous) parties despite conformance to [consensus rules](Glossary#consensus-rules), thereby shrinking the consensus group (security). Identity also exposes parties to [taint](Glossary#taint), reducing [fungibility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fungibility) (utility).