[Utility](Glossary#utility) is expressed as preference for the [coin](Glossary#coin) over substitutes, for [transfers](Glossary#transfer) of a comparable [value](Glossary#value). Increasing utility implies a rising [fee](Glossary#fee) level. Competition for [confirmation](Glossary#confirmation) bids up fees. Given differences in the [market](Glossary#market) fee [price](Glossary#price) over time, one may offer an uncompetitive fee in expectation of a longer time to confirm. Others will not [transact](Glossary#transaction) on the [chain](Glossary#chain), relying instead on substitutes.

Increasing utility therefore implies increasing average transfer value, as rising fees will otherwise cause the cost of transfer to exceed the value transferred. Greater [depth](Glossary#depth) implies greater confirmation security. Therefore time can be traded for *higher* security against [double spend](Glossary#double-spend). However time cannot be reduced below one block period to achieve *lower* security. The lowest levels of security are none ([unconfirmed](Glossary#unconfirmed)) and minimal (one confirmation). There is no trade to be made between these levels.

Higher fees imply higher [hash rate](Glossary#hash-rate), mitigating the need to increase confirmation depth for higher value transfers. **But given there is no way to reduce security for lower value transfers, the useful minimum value transfer rises with utility.** Failure to support transfers in a certain value range implies substitutes are cheaper in that range. This implies the possibility of coexisting moneys to service distinct value ranges. However, similar coins all exhibit this property.

[Rule](Glossary#rule) differences in terms of [block](Glossary#block) period or size do not change this relationship. The effect of these coin variations is strictly proportional. Even unlimited size blocks must produce fee levels that price out low value transfers.